---
ArticleId: 2d223cdc-6a66-440b-90d9-97200823d0df
ArticleIndex: 124
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
Labels: Blog
Tags: software development
URL: https://norocketscience.at/legal/
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 124
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: 2d223cdc-6a66-440b-90d9-97200823d0df
title: Self Hosted Legal Declaration
---
#  Self Hosted Legal Declaration
Thomas Brandstetter
2604 Theresienfeld

Austria

**e:** thomas@brandstetter.co.at

Exact address upon request via email.

### General information

This website is for information purposes only. I am constantly developing the contents of this website and try to provide correct and up-to-date information. Unfortunately, I can not assume any liability for the correctness of all content on this website, especially for those provided by third parties.

The content may change or be removed at any moment without prior notice. Whilst every effort is made to provide accurate information, I expressly exclude liability for any errors or inaccuracies in the content. I take no responsibility for the website being temporarily unavailable due to technical problems beyond my control.

If you notice any problematic or unlawful content, please contact me immediately, you will find the contact details on this page.

### Liability for links on this website

My website contains links to other websites whose content I am not responsible for. Liability for linked websites does not exist for me according to § 17 ECG, because I did not have knowledge of illegal activities and have not noticed such illegality and I would remove links immediately if I become aware of any illegalities.

If you notice unlawful links on my website, please contact me, you will find the contact details on this page.

### Copyright Notice

All contents of this website (pictures, photos, texts, videos) are subject to copyright of Thomas Brandstetter, unless otherwise stated. Any redistribution or reproduction of text or images without my express prior consent is strictly prohibited. If necessary, I will legally pursue the unauthorized use of parts of the contents of my site.

If you find content on this website that violates the copyright, please contact me.

## Privacy Policy

Personal data (usually referred to just as "data" below) will only be processed by me to the extent necessary and for the purpose of providing a functional and user-friendly website, including its contents, and the services offered there.

Per Art. 4 No. 1 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, i.e. the General Data Protection Regulation (hereinafter referred to as the "GDPR"), "processing" refers to any operation or set of operations such as collection, recording, organization, structuring, storage, adaptation, alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination, or otherwise making available, alignment, or combination, restriction, erasure, or destruction performed on personal data, whether by automated means or not.

The following privacy policy is intended to inform you in particular about the type, scope, purpose, duration, and legal basis for the processing of such data either under my own control or in conjunction with others. I also inform you below about the third-party components I use to optimize my website and improve the user experience which may result in said third parties also processing data they collect and control.

My privacy policy is structured as follows:

I. Information about me as controllers of your data
II. The rights of users and data subjects
III. Information about the data processing

### I. Information about me as controller of your data

The party responsible for this website (the "controller") and data protection officer for purposes of data protection law can be found on this page under "Contact".

### II. The rights of users and data subjects

With regard to the data processing to be described in more detail below, users and data subjects have the right

- to confirmation of whether data concerning them is being processed, information about the data being processed, further information about the nature of the data processing, and copies of the data (cf. also Art. 15 GDPR);
- to correct or complete incorrect or incomplete data (cf. also Art. 16 GDPR);
- to the immediate deletion of data concerning them (cf. also Art. 17 DSGVO), or, alternatively, if further processing is necessary as stipulated in Art. 17 Para. 3 GDPR, to restrict said processing per Art. 18 GDPR;
- to receive copies of the data concerning them and/or provided by them and to have the same transmitted to other providers/controllers (cf. also Art. 20 GDPR);
- to file complaints with the supervisory authority if they believe that data concerning them is being processed by the controller in breach of data protection provisions (see also Art. 77 GDPR).

In addition, the controller is obliged to inform all recipients to whom it discloses data of any such corrections, deletions, or restrictions placed on processing the same per Art. 16, 17 Para. 1, 18 GDPR. However, this obligation does not apply if such notification is impossible or involves a disproportionate effort. Nevertheless, users have a right to information about these recipients.

Likewise, under Art. 21 GDPR, users and data subjects have the right to object to the controller's future processing of their data pursuant to Art. 6 Para. 1 lit. f) GDPR. In particular, an objection to data processing for the purpose of direct advertising is permissible.

### III. Information about the data processing

Your data processed when using my website will be deleted or blocked as soon as the purpose for its storage ceases to apply, provided the deletion of the same is not in breach of any statutory storage obligations or unless otherwise stipulated below.

### Server data

For technical reasons, the following data sent by your internet browser to me or to my server provider will be collected, especially to ensure a secure and stable website: These server log files record the type and version of your browser, operating system, the website from which you came (referrer URL), the webpages on my site visited, the date and time of your visit, as well as the IP address from which you visited my site.

The data thus collected will be temporarily stored, but not in association with any other of your data.

The basis for this storage is Art. 6 Para. 1 lit. f) GDPR. My legitimate interest lies in the improvement, stability, functionality, and security of my website.

The data will be deleted within no more than seven days, unless continued storage is required for evidentiary purposes. In which case, all or part of the data will be excluded from deletion until the investigation of the relevant incident is finally resolved.

### Cookies

- **Session cookies -** I use cookies on my website. Cookies are small text files or other storage technologies stored on your computer by your browser. These cookies process certain specific information about you, such as your browser, location data, or IP address. This processing makes my website more user-friendly, efficient, and secure, allowing me, for example, to display my website in different languages or to offer a shopping cart function. The legal basis for such processing is Art. 6 Para. 1 lit. b) GDPR, insofar as these cookies are used to collect data to initiate or process contractual relationships. If the processing does not serve to initiate or process a contract, my legitimate interest lies in improving the functionality of my website. The legal basis is then Art. 6 Para. 1 lit. f) GDPR. When you close your browser, these session cookies are deleted.
- **Third-party cookies -** If necessary, my website may also use cookies from companies with whom I cooperate for the purpose of advertising, analyzing, or improving the features of my website. Please refer to the following information for details, in particular for the legal basis and purpose of such third-party collection and processing of data collected through cookies.
- **Disabling cookies -** You can refuse the use of cookies by changing the settings on your browser. Likewise, you can use the browser to delete cookies that have already been stored. However, the steps and measures required vary, depending on the browser you use. If you have any questions, please use the help function or consult the documentation for your browser or contact its maker for support. Browser settings cannot prevent so-called flash cookies from being set. Instead, you will need to change the setting of your Flash player. The steps and measures required for this also depend on the Flash player you are using. If you have any questions, please use the help function or consult the documentation for your Flash player or contact its maker for support. If you prevent or restrict the installation of cookies, not all of the functions on my site may be fully usable.

### Comment account/registration

If you create a comment account with me via my website, I will use the data you entered during registration (e.g. your name, or your email address) exclusively for services leading up to your potential placement of an comment. I also store your IP address and the date and time of your registration. This data will not be transferred to third parties.

During the registration process, your consent will be obtained for this processing of your data, with reference made to this privacy policy. The data collected by me will be used exclusively to provide your comment account.

If you give your consent to this processing, Art. 6 Para. 1 lit. a) GDPR is the legal basis for this processing.

You may revoke your prior consent to the processing of your personal data at any time under Art. 7 Para. 3 GDPR with future effect. All you have to do is inform me that you are revoking your consent.

The data previously collected will then be deleted as soon as processing is no longer necessary. However, I must observe any retention periods required under tax and commercial law.

### Contact

If you contact me via email or the contact form, the data you provide will be used for the purpose of processing your request. I must have this data in order to process and answer your inquiry; otherwise I will not be able to answer it in full or at all.

The legal basis for this data processing is Art. 6 Para. 1 lit. b) GDPR.

Your data will be deleted once I have fully answered your inquiry and there is no further legal obligation to store your data, such as if an order or contract resulted therefrom.

### User posts, comments, and ratings

I offer you the opportunity to post questions, answers, opinions, and ratings on my website, hereinafter referred to jointly as "posts." If you make use of this opportunity, I will process and publish your post, the date and time you submitted it, and any pseudonym you may have used.

The legal basis for this is Art. 6 Para. 1 lit. a) GDPR. You may revoke your prior consent under Art. 7 Para. 3 GDPR with future effect. All you have to do is inform me that you are revoking your consent.

In addition, I will also process your IP address and email address. The IP address is processed because I might have a legitimate interest in taking or supporting further action if your post infringes the rights of third parties and/or is otherwise unlawful.

In this case, the legal basis is Art. 6 Para. 1 lit. f) GDPR. My legitimate interest lies in any legal defense we may have to mount.

### LinkedIn

I maintain an online presence on LinkedIn to present my services and to communicate with customers/prospects. LinkedIn is a service of LinkedIn Ireland Unlimited Company, Wilton Plaza, Wilton Place, Dublin 2, Irland, a subsidiary of LinkedIn Corporation, 1000 W. Maude Avenue, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA.

I would like to point out that this might cause user data to be processed outside the European Union, particularly in the United States. This may increase risks for users that, for example, may make subsequent access to the user data more difficult. I also do not have access to this user data. Access is only available to LinkedIn. LinkedIn Corporation is certified under the Privacy Shield and committed to comply with European privacy standards.

[https://www.privacyshield.gov/participant?id=a2zt0000000L0UZAA0&status=Active](https://www.privacyshield.gov/participant?id=a2zt0000000L0UZAA0&status=Active)

The LinkedIn privacy policy can be found here:

[https://www.linkedin.com/legal/privacy-policy](https://www.linkedin.com/legal/privacy-policy)

[Model Data Protection Statement](https://www.ratgeberrecht.eu/leistungen/muster-datenschutzerklaerung.html) for [Anwaltskanzlei Weiß & Partner](https://www.ratgeberrecht.eu/)
