---
ArticleId: 950ef89c-57bc-40b9-86c5-93cdbf97aff5
ArticleIndex: 131
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
URL: https://homelabos.com/docs/setup/installation/
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 131
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: 950ef89c-57bc-40b9-86c5-93cdbf97aff5
title: Installation - HomelabOS
---
#  Installation - HomelabOS
Beta Software Warning

This software has not reached version 1.0 and should therefore be considered unstable. While any tagged version should work well on its own, a nice friendly upgrade path from one version to another is not guaranteed.

If you like getting your hands dirty in early versions of software, this is for you. If you prefer to wait till things are stable and friendly, maybe hold off for a while.

Also, if you trash your server or wreck your data, that's on you. Test your backups. Trust nothing.

Warning

If you are running on an ARM infrastructure such as Raspberry PI, set `arm` to true. Run: `make set arm True`

Note

Two separate computers are not required, but are highly recommended. The idea is you have a server and then your personal computer, say a laptop or desktop. You deploy from your personal computer to the server. This way your settings are saved on your personal computer, and can be used to re-build the server and restore from backups if anything goes wrong.

Warning

If you do install HomelabOS directly on the server and deploy from there, make sure to back up your `settings/` folder from the server to somewhere safe, otherwise you could lose your settings.

Note

This is optional because you can use Tor to access your services without registering a domain. For best support from 3rd party clients an actual domain is highly recommended. Also certain services do not work through TOR at the moment.

Note

It's easiest to have an actual domain to point at your services, but you can `fake` it by adding DNS overrides to your `/etc/hosts` file on *nix and MacOS if needed or for testing.

Warning

If you are not using a real domain, but using `/etc/hosts` entries to 'fake' it, wildcard entries do not work in `/etc/hosts`. You need to create an entry for each service enabled. You can use the `/var/homelabos/homelab_hosts` file.

Note

This is optional because if you are using the [bastion](https://homelabos.com/docs/setup/bastion/) server or [TOR access](https://homelabos.com/docs/setup/tor/), you do not need to deal with port forwarding or firewalls.

Note

You will be prompted for the basic information to get started. The passwords entered here will be stored on the client computer and are used by ansible to configure your server. After you enter the information, HomelabOS will configure your local docker images and build your initial `settings/` files.

Warning

Some services expose set up pages on start up. If you don't complete the set up step, there is a chance someone else could beat you to it. If they do just run `make reset_one SERVICENAME` then `make` again and the service will reset to it's freshly installed state.
