---
ArticleId: 3757369e-3899-4fb6-97cf-b9c8f77efd69
ArticleIndex: 136
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
URL: https://news.knowledia.com/US/en/articles/using-tinc-to-access-a-home-server-c1619504b2c9911d0d6bc48303c7ea4e41c36f55
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 136
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: 3757369e-3899-4fb6-97cf-b9c8f77efd69
title: Using tinc to access a home server
---
#  Using tinc to access a home server
Article URL: https://jordancrawford.kiwi/setting-up-tinc/ Comments URL: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=22407203 Points: 1 # Comments: 0

About a year ago, I posted two articles about setting up my Raspberry Pi as a home server and how I setup remote access to it from anywhere in the world without using portforwarding. I've had a few people stumble across my post, asking questions and sharing details about their projects with me! I thought I'd take the time to better address an area people seem to be having difficulty with, which is how to setup a tinc network between a cloud server and a computer on a home network.
What are we trying to achieve?
Lets say you want to access some content or service from a computer at your house from some other computer on the internet. But, like with most home network setups your computer isn't reachable from the public internet. This is probably because your home network has a dynamic IP address and some other restrictions (like firewalls and NATs) that make connecting to it a challenge.
We can achieve this if the computer you want to connect from has a fixed public IP address. But how? Well, the computer at home can still make outgoing connections to the one with a fixed IP address. We can tunnel network traffic through this connection to link the machines together; this is called a Virtual Private Network (VPN).
In my situation, I wanted to get access to services on my Raspberry Pi at home from anywhere on the internet without needing to configure port forwarding. The first step in this was to establish a reliable VPN between my Pi and cloud server so that when I access an address like "plex.jordancrawford.kiwi" my cloud server can pass the traffic through the VPN link to the Pi at home.
tinc is an awesome open-source piece of software that we'll use to setup this VPN link. My Raspberry Pi runs HypriotOS (but Raspbian is a good option too) and my cloud server is a Vultr cloud server running Ubuntu.
Installing tinc
You'll need tinc installed on both the home server and the cloud server.
Manual installation
Installing tinc will vary by operating system, so Google is your friend. But, if you're feeling lucky, try the following commands:
sudo -s apt-get update apt-get install tinc
If you don't have any luck, you could try compiling it from source.
Verify your installation works by running the command tincd --help . If this outputs a message explaining all the options of tinc then everything worked fine!
Your tinc config directory will be /etc/tinc by default.
With Docker
I personally use Docker to run tinc in a container on my home server - I wrote more about Docker in my Raspberry Pi home server article.
On the Linux x86 server I use: jenserat/tinc
On a Raspberry Pi I use: jordancrawford/rpi-tinc.
Make a directory somewhere on your system for your tinc config. For both the above Docker images, you should configure a volume mapping from your tinc config directory to /etc/tinc inside the tinc container.
Planning our configuration
We're using tinc for quite a simple usecase, and as a result, the only things we need to plan out in advance are the names and IP addresses of each of our servers on the tinc network.
I'll call my cloud server with the public fixed IP address cloud , and my home server behind a home network home .
For the IP addresses, we want an IP address range that won't clash with my home's local network. I find the 10.0.0.XXX works pretty well, so I'll configure the IP's as below.
Computer Name tinc IP cloud 10.0.0.1 home 10.0.0.2
This means that from the cloud server, accessing 10.0.0.2 will route us to the home server on the other side of the tinc tunnel, and vice versa.
Configuring cloud
Lets start by configuring the cloud server.
You can find my full example configuration for the cloud server on GitHub.
Config file
In your tinc config directory, open your favorite text editor and make a tinc.conf file.
Lets fill this in with the following:
Name = cloud AddressFamily = ipv4 Interface = tun0
This just says that the name of our server on tinc is "cloud", that it uses IPv4 and uses a network interface called tun0 .
Up and down scripts
Next we need to setup a tinc-up and…
