---
ArticleId: b28e6d1e-3a1c-4aa0-a7e7-08e04168050f
ArticleIndex: 142
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
URL: https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/VM_Templates_and_Clones
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 142
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: b28e6d1e-3a1c-4aa0-a7e7-08e04168050f
title: VM Templates and Clones - Proxmox VE
---
#  VM Templates and Clones - Proxmox VE
## Introduction

A template is a fully pre-configured operating system image that can used to deploy KVM virtual machines. Creating a special template is usually preferred over [cloning an existing VM](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Duplicate_Virtual_Machines).

Deploying virtual machines from templates is blazing fast, very comfortable and if you use linked clones you can optimize your storage by using base images and thin-provisioning.

Proxmox VE includes container based templates since 2008 and beginning with the V3.x series, additionally KVM templates can be created and deployed.

## Definitions

- **VM** - KVM based virtual machine
- **Templates** - Templates are pre-configured operating system environments that deploy in a couple of clicks
- **Linked Clone** - A linked clone VM requires less disk space but cannot run without access to the base VM Template
- **Full Clone** - A full clone VM is a complete copy and is fully independant to the original VM or VM Template, but requires the same disk space as the original.

## Create VM Template

Templates are created by converting a VM to a template.

1. Install your VM with all drivers and needed software packages
2. Remove all user data, passwords and keys - In order to do this run sysprep on Windows or similar tools or scripts on Linux and just power-off the VM.
3. **Right-click** the VM and select "Convert to template"

**Note**

As soon as the VM is converted, it cannot be started anymore and the icon changes. If you want to modify an existing template, you need to deploy a full clone from this template and do the steps above again.

### OS specific notes for Templates

For productive usage it is highly recommended that a template does not include any data, user accounts or SSH keys so you should remove all before you convert the VM to a template. On Linux systems you should remove SSH host keys, persistent network MAC configuration and user accounts and user data. Windows offers a bunch of tools for this, e.g. sysprep.

For testing purposes it may be useful to use a fully installed OS as a template.

- Ubuntu: e.g. install with 'OEM mode' (press F4)
- CentOS7: Most steps in this [guide](https://github.com/rharmonson/richtech/wiki/CentOS-7-1511-Minimal-oVirt-Template) are valid for PVE too.

## Deploy a VM from a Template

Right-click the template, and select "Clone".

A full clone VM is a complete copy and is fully independent from the original VM or VM Template, but it requires the same disk space as the original.

### Linked Clone

A linked clone VM requires less disk space but cannot run without access to the base VM Template.

Linked Clones works for theses storages: files in raw, qcow2, vmdk format (either on local storage or nfs); LVM-thin, ZFS, rbd, sheepdog, nexenta.

It's not supported with LVM & ISCSI storage.

## Video Tutorials

## Troubleshooting
