---
ArticleId: 1042e1e3-fa6b-47bd-ad38-a85aeabf4a69
ArticleIndex: 145
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
URL: https://www.ixsystems.com/community/threads/freenas-to-nfs-to-proxmox-to-smb-help.83338/
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 145
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: 1042e1e3-fa6b-47bd-ad38-a85aeabf4a69
title: FreeNAS to NFS to Proxmox to SMB help | iXsystems Community
---
#  FreeNAS to NFS to Proxmox to SMB help | iXsystems Community
Trying to setup a new FreeNAS box (11.3) with the following goals - Windows/Mac SMB access to all files/datasets - Proxmox VM/LXC/Docker access to all files/datasets - 10Gbe speeds to handle remote 4k video editing

Currently I am doing this with a single Proxmox box. It runs everything over 10Gbe. The main ZPool is locally attached via HBA card and all storage is bind mounted to all VMs/LXC/Docker containers.

In this setup for example, I have a Docker container for both Deluge and Plex running with access to /mypool/mydataset/Movies. Both can read/write to the share with correct permissions and at full speed as they are all on the same box. Another VM is running Samba and sharing the same /mypool/mydataset/Movies over SMB so I can directly access the files if needed.

This setup works great, but after using Freenas for 10+ years I find Proxmox's managment of my Zpool, reporting, backups, smart monitoring etc super lacking. Ideally I would like to setup a new FreeNAS box that is *just* a filer. I'll let freenas deal with just the zfs pool, monitoring, maintainance etc and a seperate Proxmox box will handle exposing services and shares like Plex, Samba, etc

I'm having trouble getting this setup to work/work well. The idea was FreeNAS would expose a single /mypool/ NFS share and then the Proxmox box would consume it and provide bind mounds as needed, /mypool/mydataset/ etc.

I started building the new box, put in a dual 10gbe card in both servers, setup NFS, connected both boxes together and I am able to see data on the ZFS pool from inside an LXC in Proxmox, so that looks like FreeNAS ZFS Pool -> NFS -> 10Gbe -> Proxmox Host -> LXC. The Issue I am running into is the LXC can't successfully share the mounted NFS share (etc/fstab) over SMB even though it can locally connect and write to it.

After spending a few days playing with this it makes me think that maybe this isnt the best route to go? Can anyone offer some guidance on how to best configure my current setup to accomplish my goals or what I might be missing in my NFS setup?
