---
ArticleId: 3f61e803-1716-4dca-8c3b-26836015a8c5
ArticleIndex: 16
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:40 PM
Labels: evernote, postach.io
Published: Sep 16, 2019
Tags: c#, software development
URL: https://blogs.msmvps.com/peterritchie/2011/11/24/if-you-re-using-if-debug-you-re-doing-it-wrong/
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 16
author: Kailash Vetal
date: 2019-09-16
hero: max-nelson-taiuG8CPKAQ-unsplash.jpg
secret: false
slug: 3f61e803-1716-4dca-8c3b-26836015a8c5
status: published
title: If You’re Using “#if DEBUG”, You’re Doing it Wrong
---
#  If You’re Using “#if DEBUG”, You’re Doing it Wrong
I was going through some legacy code the other day, refactoring it all over the place and I ran into many blocks of code wrapped in “#if DEBUG”. Of course, after a bit of refactoring in a RELEASE configuration these blocks of code were quickly out of date (and by out of date, I mean no longer compiling). A huge PITA.

For example, take the following code:

publicclassMyCommand

{

publicDateTime DateAndTimeOfTransaction;

}

publicclassTest

{

//...

publicvoid ProcessCommand(MyCommand myCommand)

{

#if DEBUG

if (myCommand.DateAndTimeOfTransaction > DateTime.Now)

throw new InvalidOperationException("DateTime expected to be in the past");

#endif

// do more stuff with myCommand...

}

//...

}

If, while my active configuration is RELEASE, I rename-refactor DateAndTimeOfTransaction to TransactionDateTime then the block of code in the #if DEBUG is now invalid—DateAndTimeOfTransaction will not be renamed within this block. I will now get compile errors if I switch to DEBUG configuration (or worse still, if I check in an my continuous integration environment does a debug build).

I would have run into the same problem had I been in a DEBUG configuration with all the “#if RELEASE” blocks. Yes, I could create a configuration and define DEBUG **and** RELEASE and do my work in there. Yeah, no, not going down that twisted path… i.e. try doing it without manually adding a conditional compilation symbol.

I got to thinking about a better way. It dawned on me that #if blocks are effectively comments in other configurations (assuming DEBUG or RELEASE; but true with any symbol) and that [comments are apologies](http://bit.ly/vDJekK), and it quickly became clear to me how to fix this.

Enter Extract Method refactoring and Conditional Methods. If you’ve been living under a rock or have simply forgotten, there exists a type in the BCL: System.Diagnostics.ConditionalAttribute. You put this attribute on methods that[whose calls] may or may not be included in the resulting binary (IL). But, they are still compiled (and thus syntax checked). So, if I followed the basic tenet for [code comment smells](http://bit.ly/47Ld1d) and performed an Extract Method refactoring and applied the ConditionalAttribute to the resulting method, I’d end up with something like this:

//...

publicvoid ProcessCommand(MyCommand myCommand)

{

CheckMyCommandPreconditions(myCommand);

// do more stuff with myCommand...

}

[Conditional("DEBUG")]

privatestaticvoid CheckMyCommandPreconditions(MyCommand myCommand)

{

if (myCommand.DateAndTimeOfTransaction > DateTime.Now)

thrownewInvalidOperationException("DateTime expected to be in the past");

}

Now, if I perform a rename refactoring on MyCommand.DateAndTimeOfTransaction, **all** usages of DateAndTimeOfTransaction get renamed and I no longer introduce compile errors.

### Code Contracts

If you look closely at the name I chose for the extracted method you’ll notice that what this DEBUG code is actually doing is asserting method preconditions. This type of thing is actually supported in [Code Contracts](http://bit.ly/s23uAU). Code Contracts implement a concept called [Design by Contract](http://bit.ly/szEmTc) (DbC). One benefit to DbC is that these checks are effectively proved at compile time so there’s no reason to perform this check at runtime or [even write unit tests to check them](http://bit.ly/tYnSGC) because code to violate them becomes a “compile error” with Code Contracts. But, for my example I didn’t use DbC despite potentially being a better way of implementing this particular code.

Anyone know what we call a refactoring that introduces unwanted side-effects like compile errors?

[UPDATE: small correction to the description of conditional methods and what does/doesn’t get generated to IL based on comment from Motti Shaked]
