---
ArticleId: be64d96d-a67d-4f3c-a36b-e66d9803dd6d
ArticleIndex: 165
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
URL: https://forums.servethehome.com/index.php?threads/trying-to-decide-freenas-unraid-rockstor-proxmox-etc.25107/
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 165
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: be64d96d-a67d-4f3c-a36b-e66d9803dd6d
title: Trying to decide- FreeNAS, Unraid, Rockstor, Proxmox, etc. | ServeTheHome Forums
---
#  Trying to decide- FreeNAS, Unraid, Rockstor, Proxmox, etc. | ServeTheHome Forums
I'm changing my home lab environment around a little and trying to get a bit more flexibility in my storage and hypervisor setup, and I would love some advice regarding which NAS operating system might be best for my environment.

Apologies in advance for the long post!

TLDR - Looking for a fast NAS operating system for storing lots of large virtual machine images FreeNAS is probably the answer, but I thought I'd see what people thought first.

I currently have an all-in-one type of setup with ESXi hosting everything with HBA's passed through physically to an XPEnology (Synology) NAS storage and jack-of-all trades system that's running lots of dockers with cloud sync, plex, hydra, sabnzbd, sonarr, etc. It then hosts a lot of firewalls, and networking VM's as I have a big lab environment for testing.

My thoughts are to split it up and have separate storage and hypervisors, and I'm trying to work with the hardware I already have while adding relatively inexpensive parts for more speed

I will probably switch hypervisors every now and again, but want the storage to be more static

Networking is 2 x Juniper EX2300-C switches so I have 4 x 10G SFP's, but 2 of those are used connecting the switches as they are at opposite ends of my house.

This is the hardware I have and my rough thoughts right now...

**Storage system** Operating system is unknown, but I would like it to be flexible and fast Hopefully I can get this to saturate 10G and provide VM storage to networked hypervisors I could possibly host cloud sync, plex, hydra, sabnzbd, sonarr, etc. here

- Silverstone CS380
- X9SRL-F
- E5-1660 v2 for fast single core speed
- 64G ram
- SSD boot drives from motherboard ports
- NVME?
- Mellanox CX3 connected to EX2300 at 10G
- 1 x SAS 3008 HBA for 8 x 1TB SSD's
- 1 x SAS 2008 HBA for random disks

**Main Hypervisor**[EVE-NG](https://www.eve-ng.net/) because it's like working in Visio  Hosting all sorts of Network and Security based virtual machines, and windows, linux etc.

- NZXT H440
- X9SRL-F
- E5-2695 v2 for lots of cores
- 128G ram
- SSD/NVME local storage
- iSCSI or NFS to NAS
- Mellanox CX3 port 1 connected to EX2300 at 10G
- Mellanox CX3 port 2 directly connected to my workstation at 40G

**Perimeter Hypervisor** ESXi or Proxmox or whatever works really Primarily hosting OPNsense firewall, Pi-hole, Honeypots, etc. Definitely switching perimeter firewalls every now and again between opensource and Juniper, PaloAlto etc. Xfinity is only 1G so I'm ok with using the onboard NIC's

- Raijintek Metis
- Asrock Rack E3C224D2I
- E3-1265L v3
- 16G ram (maxed)
- SSD/NVME local storage
- 2 x Intel i210
- iSCSI or NFS to NAS, but it's going to be 1G speeds
