---
ArticleId: 30922a7f-189b-4366-a9d3-99d86b6985bf
ArticleIndex: 36
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
URL: http://redecentralize.github.io/alternative-internet/
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 36
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: 30922a7f-189b-4366-a9d3-99d86b6985bf
title: Alternative Internet
---
#  Alternative Internet
Ampify

Ampify is an open source, decentralised, social platform. It is intended as a successor to the Open Web and as a replacement for closed platforms like iOS and Facebook by providing a web application framework to create social apps on top of a secure, decentralised core.

AnoNet

AnoNet is a decentralized friend-to-friend network built using VPNs and software BGP routers. anoNet works by making it difficult to learn the identities of others on the network allowing them to anonymously host IPv4 and IPv6 services)

arkOS

arkOS is an operating system and software stack to easily host your own websites, email addresses, cloud services and more. It uses a graphical interface (called Genesis) to do all of this, with a focus on end-user experience and simple design. Presently in active development, it is currently functional on the Raspberry Pi with new services and platforms in the works.

Askemos

A fast and trustworthy foundation on which to build applications: Byzantine fault-tolerant P2P computation and storage.Askemos creates an “autonomous virtual execution environment for applications” - designed to be tamper-proof and fault tolerant. Users share not only static files but dynamic objects too. Code is taken as equivalent to contracts (“smart contracts”) and hosts check each others compliance.It executes the code on several different machines, runtime libraries, compilers, operating systems etc. in parallel. Signed cryptographic hash are compared/stored for every transaction. Thus, this counters subversion of various components, eliminating the need to trust.

Avatar

Avatar is a distributed “operating system for the internet” running inside the web browser. It allows for secure messaging (think email, social networks) and distributed data storage, employing a policy of “privacy and data security by default”. Building its own encrypted P2P network, it does not rely upon any central authority.

BaseParadigm

BaseParadigm is anopen source (GPLv3) library for managing a content addressable binarysemantic graph. Content addressability means enabling a number of dataexchange protocols (including p2p) for a developer usingBaseParadigm. Content addressable data is immutable, and so a semanticgraph is necessary for managing updates, annotations, reputation, andnavigational links. BaseParadigm lays the basis for a new paradigm fordata management that can be done offline as much as is desirable, andputs control over data storage, transmission, and processing back inthe hands of the user. Identity management becomes data managementrather than what it is today: contract management with third party webservices. Application interop is simplified from web API support tosimple graph queries. The user’s experience is that all their data isavailable all the time in the places they expect.

BipIO

BipIO is an open source personal content and workflow automation platform. ‘Bips’ are dynamic named graphs which are cheap to create, can auto-expire, and serve or transform public/private content across multiple protocols.

Bitcloud

Bitcloud is an open source distributed cloud storage system and escrow agent based on Tahoe-LAFS that allows publishers to pay storage nodes for storing encrypted data and sharing that data with others. The decentralized nature of Bitcloud allows anyone to publish large amounts of data in a way that is free from censorship, high costs, and proprietary software. The first application for bitcloud will be WeTube, a platform for viewing and publishing videos, podcasts, ebooks, music, and other forms of media.

BitMessage

BitMessage is a P2P communications protocol used to send encrypted messages to another person or to many subscribers. It is decentralized and trustless, meaning that you need-not inherently trust any entities like root certificate authorities. See whitepaper

BitTorrent Sync

[BitTorrent Sync](http://www.bittorrent.com/sync) by BitTorrent Labs. Easy and effortless file replication between computers (and mobile devices) without using the cloud, so the only limit is available storage. All data transfers are encrypted. Works on Windows, Linux, OSX, Android and iOS. Recently they’ve opened up their API to developers.

BriarProject

The BriarProject is building secure communication tools to enable journalists, activists and civil society groups to communicate safely without fear of government interference. Our open source mobile and desktop apps will provide a secure, easy-to-use alternative to email, blogs and message boards, where users can exchange private messages with their contacts, create their own blogs and message boards, and subscribe to blogs and boards their contacts have shared.

Buddycloud

Buddycloud is built for people who care about their privacy. We are building the future of social networks. A future founded on openness. A future built using open standards. We are making the future happen now, by building a massively scaled and fully distributed social network. Buddycloud is leading a quiet revolution to replace the closed retweet and like incumbents.

Cables

Cables communication implements secure and anonymous communication using email-like addresses, pioneered in Liberté Linux. Cables communication is Liberté’s pivotal component for enabling anyone to communicate safely and covertly in hostile environments.

cjdns

cjdns - Encrypted networking for regular people. cjdns implements an encrypted IPv6 network using public key cryptography for address allocation and a distributed hash table for routing. This provides near zero-configuration networking without many of the security and robustness issues that regular IPv4 and IPv6 networks have.

Coinpunk

Coinpunk is a web application that allows anyone to run their own self-hosted Bitcoin wallet service that is accessible from your web browser anywhere in the world. It’s free, open source, and you can install it on your server right now.

Cowbox

Cowbox is a hand-held standalone server, broadcasting its own network and containing web applications for coworking.

Cozy

Cozy is a personal cloud you can host, hack and delete. With Cozy, you manage your web apps like you were on your smartphone. It provides an open market place from where you can install the web app you made yourself (Cozy is a [personal PaaS](http://cozy.io/hack/getting-started/architecture-overview.html)). Today, the most successful applications are Contact and Calendar managers that you can synchronize with any device. Check the demo to discover more applications.

CryptAByte

CryptAByte CryptAByte.com is a free online drop box that enables secure (encrypted) message and file sharing over the web using a public-key infrastructure. Messages and files are encrypted using a public key and can only be decrypted using the passphrase entered when your key is created. Your data is never stored in plaintext, and is impossible to decrypt without your passphrase.

Cryptosphere

The Cryptosphere is a global peer-to-peer cryptosystem for publishing and securely distributing both data and HTML5/JS applications pseudonymously with no central point of failure. It’s built on top of the next-generation [Networking and Cryptography (NaCl) library](http://nacl.cr.yp.to/) and the Git data model. Code

DAppStore

DAppStore is a fully decentralized App store focussing entirely on decentralized software. Primarily to index DApps like Bitcoin, BitTorrent etc, but also indexes projects relating to DApps, wether that be a documentary, software library or coffee shop that supports a particular DApp.

Dendrio

Dendrio is a video distribution network that leverages the peer to peer WebRTC protocol to transfer website content between browsers. This allows us to make data downloads faster for users but without any installation requirements. For website owners, we are trivial to set up, and are transparent to existing CDN setups. Our technology is geared towards streaming video and we support a multitude of different video formats and players.

Diaspora*

Diaspora* is a free social network consisting of personal web server that implements a distributed social networking service. Diaspora* is a fun and creative community that puts you in control.

dn42

dn42 is a big dynamic VPN network, which employs Internet technologies (BGP, whois database, DNS, etc). Participants connect to each other using network tunnels (GRE, OpenVPN, Tinc, IPsec), and exchange routes thanks to the Border Gateway Protocol. Network addresses are assigned in the 172.22.0.0/15 range, and private AS numbers are used: see registry. See the About page for more information.

DNSChain

Drogulus

The Drogulus (WIP) is a programmable peer-to-peer data store. It’s an open, federated and decentralised system where the identity of users and provenance of data is ensured by cryptographically signing digital assets.Redecentralise Video interview

edgenet

eDonkey network (eD2k)

eDonkey network is a decentralized, mostly server-based, peer-to-peer file sharing network best suited to share big files among users, and to provide long term availability of files

Enigmabox

Folpy

FreedomBox

Freedom Box is about privacy, control, ease of use and dehierarchicalization. Inspired by Eben Moglen’s vision of a small, cheap and simple computer that serves freedom in the home. We are building a Debian based platform for distributed applications.

Freenet

Freenet is free software which lets you anonymously share files, browse and publish “freesites” (web sites accessible only through Freenet) and chat on forums, without fear of censorship. Freenet is decentralised to make it less vulnerable to attack, and if used in “darknet” mode, where users only connect to their friends, is very difficult to detect.

GNU/consensus

GNU/consensus is a GNU project to coordinate development efforts of free software for social networking. It recommends using the [AGPLv3+ license](https://gnu.org/licenses/agpl) and aims to inform free software developers about interesting projects and perspectives for a decentralized, freedom-respecting, and privacy-respecting online social networking environment. The GNU/consensus promotes convergence towards the use of the extensible GNUnet Social API.

GNUnet

Hyperboria

I2P

I2P is an anonymizing network, offering a simple layer that identity-sensitive applications can use to securely communicate. All data is wrapped with several layers of encryption, and the network is both distributed and dynamic, with no trusted parties.

INDX

INDX is a decentralised Web-based Personal Data Store and app platform from the [SOCIAM](http://sociam.org/) EPSRC project in the UK, focused about giving individuals autonomy to effectively consolidate their cloud data into personal databases they control. The platform is build out of a core of robust open source tools, including Postgres, Twisted, NodeJS, and AngularJS. The platform is released under GPLv3 on Github.

IPFS

IPFS is a new hypermedia distribution protocol, addressed by content and identities. IPFS enables the creation of completely distributed applications. It aims to make the web faster, safer, and more open. IPFS is an open source project developed by the team at Interplanetary Networks and many contributors from the open source community.

Keybits

Keybits makes it easy to run your own personal server. Setup and maintenance is made simple by using Docker and Ansible. (Similar to Sovereign but using Docker to ‘containerize’ applications.)

Known

Known is a simple way to share your story with a variety of media, from any device. Aligned with the indie web movement, Known sites can be installed on your own server, and each one will operate as a node in a global social network, together with other indie web platforms. Known is fully extensible and supports microblogging, photos, articles, events, location check-ins and bookmarks out of the box. It is a responsive web platform that works on anything with a web browser.

Kune

Kune is based on Apache Wave and is a free/open source distributed social network focused on collaboration rather than just on communication.[2] That is, it focuses on online real-time collaborative editing, decentralized social networking and web publishing, while focusing on workgroups rather than just on individuals.

Libertree

Libertree is free, libre, open-source software which is intended to provide a way for people to create their own social network. Libertree social networks can be free from commercial influence and manifestation, such as behaviour tracking, user profiling, advertising, data mining and analysis, and covert information filtering.

MaidSafe

The MaidSafe network is a fully distributed platform on which application developers can build distributed applications. The network is made up by individual users who contribute storage, computing power and bandwidth to what is a global, public cloud.

Mail-in-a-Box

Mailpile

Mailpile is free software, a web-mail program that you run on your own computer, so your data stays under your control. Because it is free software (a.k.a. open source), you can look under the hood and see how it works, or even modify it to make it better suit your particular needs. Mailpile is designed for speed and vast amounts of e-mail, it is flexible and themeable and has support for strong encryption built in from the very start.

Matrix

MediaCrush

MediaCrush is free software (as in freedom and as in beer) for hosting media on the web. It’s designed from the ground up to protect users’ privacy and it losslessly compresses media whenever possible. It supports more than 500 formats of images, video and audio. If ffmpeg accepts it, MediaCrush can process it. It also converts GIFs to HTML5 video.

MediaGoblin

GNU MediaGoblin (also shortened to MediaGoblin or GMG) is a free, decentralized Web platform (server software) for hosting and sharing digital media, aimed at providing an extensible, adaptive, and freedom-respectful software alternative to major media publishing services such as Flickr, deviantArt, YouTube, etc.– Wikipedia

MettaNode

MettaNode is a tool for fully decentralized communications - grab data you like and store it forever, share data with your friends, start chats, voice or video calls, form groups by interest, transparently keep all your notes between all of your devices; all based on a simple ideas of [UIA](http://pdos.csail.mit.edu/uia/). It is still in its infancy and only base transport protocol is done, work is now going on on overlay routing network. Final target is to have a bunch of clients for desktop and mobile platforms (Win, Mac, Linux, Android, iOS) as well as own operating system implementation (Metta) running together.

Mixmaster

Nightweb

Nightweb connects your Android device or PC to an anonymous, peer-to-peer social network. You can write posts and share photos, and your followers will retrieve them using BitTorrent running over the I2P anonymous network. It is still experimental.

Nymote

Nymote is a set of tools and software infrastructure, created from the ground up, to provide end-users with life-long control of their networks and personal data. It starts with fundamental infrastructure to solve the problems around operating systems for the future, identity for users and devices and data-persistence across those devices. Think of it as the toolstack to recapture the original vision of a resilient, decentralised Internet.

OpenLibernet

OpenLibernet is a project to create a robust decentralized global mesh communication network that regards security and privacy as a priority and makes internet regulation and censorship impossible. OpenLibernet is built around a robust payment system based on Bitcoin that rewards its users for actively joining, expanding and maintaining the network, and creates a traffic economy with perpetually decreasing prices.

OpenNIC

Ori

Ori is a distributed file system built for offline operation and empowers the user with control over synchronization operations and conflict resolution. It provides history through light weight snapshots and allows users to verify the history has not been tampered with. Through the use of replication instances it is resilient and can recover damaged data from other nodes.

Osiris

Ostel

Ostel is part of the Open Secure Telephony Network (OSTN) by the Guardian-Project. The goal is promoting free, open protocols, standards and software and to power end-to-end encrypted voice communications on mobile devices and desktop computers. They use standards such as SRTP, ZRTP, and SIP(over TLS). Clients are available for nearly every platform.

ownCloud

PeerServer

Peersm

Peerm Anonymous P2P inside browsers, no installation, encrypted and secure. The browsers are talking the Tor protocol extended to P2P and are connecting to the nodes using WebSockets, multi-sources and streaming are supported. The final goal is to build a complete serverless P2P where anonymizer nodes are inside the browsers too relaying the traffic, using WebRTC.

Piwik

Piwik is the leading open web analytics platform currently used by individuals, companies and governments all over the world. With Piwik, your data will always be yours. Piwik is an alternative to Google Universal Analytics.

Project Byzantium

Project Byzantium - Ad-hoc wireless mesh networking for the zombie apocalypse. The goal of Project Byzantium is to develop a communication system by which users can connect to each other and share information in the absence of convenient access to the Internet. This is done by setting up an ad-hoc wireless mesh network that offers services which replace popular websites often used for this purpose, such as Twitter and IRC.

Project Meshnet

Quick mesh project

Quick mesh project is an openwrt based mesh networking firmware. Can be installed on any openwrt supported system. Auto configures any needed connections, auto detects internet connections and aunounces them. Native IPv6 support with IPv4 tunnels for current networking support.

Samizdat

Samizdat is a self-replicating LiveCD which creates an IPSec VPN between each newly-created LiveCD node and the system that created it. It is thus “rhizomal” in the sense of Serval, but its objectives are more like those of arkOS: each node runs peer-to-peer services intended to replace the centralized services of github, skype, facebook, gmail, etc.. Samizdat provides strong cryptography for authentication of users over the network, and full disk encryption for installed systems, providing novice users fully-automated (zero-learning-curve) access to high-grade security. Samizdat’s installer does not ask any questions of the user except where to install. The goal of Samizdat is to provide the benefits of public key cryptography to users who do not even understand what public key cryptography is.(Samizdat is also – incidentally – a generic framework for creating and managing LiveCD images for other purposes, such as managing multiple systems on a LAN, or system backup.)Send mail to samizdat@lists.riseup.net (public mailing list) or samizdat@childrenofmay.org (private email of project founder) for more information.

Sandstorm.io

Scramble

Scramble is easy-to-use, open source encrypted email. Scramble server has no knowledge of the message contents, since encryption is always performed end-to-end on the clients. Public keys are verified using a fedetared trust model based on multiple independent notaries.

SlapOS

Smallest Federated Wiki

Smallest Federated Wiki innovates in three ways. It shares through federation, composes by refactoring and wraps data with visualization.The project aims to demonstrate that wiki would have been better had it been effectively federated from the beginning, and explore federation policies necessary to sustain an open creative community.

Sneer

Sneer is a free and open source sovereign computing platform. It runs on your Windows, Mac or Linux machine (like Skype or Firefox) using the Java VM. It enables you to create your personal cluster by sharing hardware resources (CPU, disk space, network bandwidth) with your friends, host your own social network, information and media, create sovereign applications and share them with others, download and run sovereign applications created by others.You can do all these things directly with your peers, in an autonomous, sovereign way, without depending on online service providers such as email providers, Google, Facebook, etc.

SocietyOfMind

Starkit

Starkit is a private cloud plug-n-play secure email server for private communication allowing you the benefits of secure email as soon as you turn it on. Bundled with Web-based interface for anywhere access. Apart from a Secure Mail Server You can use Starkit as your Secure Private Cloud storage to save important documents, photos and videos and access your stuff from anywhere. Requires zero maintenance.

StatusNet

SubToMe

SyncNet

SyncNet is a decentralized web browser built on top of BitTorrent Sync and (soon) Colored Coins for name resolution. Every time you access a site, you store all of its contents on your machine. The next user to request the site can get the contents from both your machine and the original server. As more people access a page, it becomes available from more machines, reducing the load on the original server.

Syncthing!

Tent protocol

Tent is a protocol that puts users back in control. Users should control the data they create, choose who can access it, and change service providers without losing their social graph.Tent is a protocol, not a platform. Like email, anyone can build Tent apps or host Tent servers, all Tent servers can talk to each other, and there is no central authority to restrict users or developers.

Thali

Tiki Suite

Tiki Suite is a selection of Free / Libre / Open Source Software (FLOSS) server, web, mobile and desktop apps with a concerted effort for greater interoperability, security and adaptability, which is aimed at small & medium-sized organizations. The Tiki Suite is especially suited to decentralized and knowledge-centric organizations and offers most (80%+) of the features all organizations need, such as: Email, Website & Blog, Shopping Cart, Intranet & Project Management, E-learning, Social Networking, Knowledge base, File sharing, Issue Tracker, Video-conferencing, LDAP, VPN, Gateway, Network, etc. You can install anywhere (home, office, laptop, rented server, etc.)

Tomb

Dyne’s Tomb the crypto-undertaker is free software for easy encryption and backup of personal files, written in a single ZShell script that is easy to review and links commonly shared components (such as cryptsetup), unlike TrueCrypt. Tomb implements and encourages OPSEC best-practice, and comes with bind and execution hooks, steganography of keys and fast search over filenames and contents, and a graphical user interface.

Tor

Tox

Tribler

Tribler aims to create a censorship-free Internet. Already deployed, used and incrementally improved for 8-years. Tribler uses an upcoming IETF Internet Standard for video streaming - http://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-ppsp-peer-protocol/ - and is backward compatible with Bittorrent. Future aim is using smartphones to even bypass Internet kill switches. An early proof-of-principle [Tribler-mobile](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.tribler.mobile) is available on the Android Market. [Key principle](http://www.foxnews.com/tech/2012/02/10/forget-megaupload-researchers-call-new-file-sharing-network-invincible/): ‘the only way to take it down is to take The Internet down’. Overview paper.

Trovebox

Truecrypt

TrueCrypt Free open source disk encryption software for Windows 7/Vista/XP/Mac OSX/ & Linux. Creates a virtual encrypted disk within a file and mounts it as a real disk. Encrypts an entire partition or storage device such as USB flash drive or hard drive. Encrypts a partition or drive where Windows is installed (pre-boot authentication). Encryption is automatic, real-time (on-the-fly) and transparent. Parallelization and pipelining allow data to be read and written as fast as if the drive was not encrypted. Encryption can be hardware-accelerated on modern processors. Provides plausible deniability, in case an adversary forces you to reveal the password: Hidden volume (steganography) and hidden operating system. More information on documentation page

Twister

Twister is a secure and fully-decentralized P2P microblogging platform based on concepts and code from Bitcoin and Libtorrent (as described in [this whitepaper](http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.7152)). Feel free to contribute to its [core service](https://github.com/miguelfreitas/twister-core) or HTML UI!

Webfist

wlan slovenija

Yaap it !

Yaap it ! is another client-side encrypted burn-after-reading sharing service. It’s written in JavaScript and you can install it on you own server: https://github.com/SeyZ/yaapit

YaCy

ZeroTier One

ZeroTier One is an open source application that creates huge distributed Ethernet networks. It makes use of supernodes, but these run the same code as ordinary nodes and end-to-end encryption protects all unicast traffic. Semi-commercial with a freemium model.
