---
ArticleId: 5d67eec0-5b25-4a58-b484-6fce68f4c298
ArticleIndex: 41
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
URL: https://blog.bitsrc.io/13-graphql-tools-and-libraries-you-should-know-in-2019-e4b9005f6fc2
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 41
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: 5d67eec0-5b25-4a58-b484-6fce68f4c298
title: 13 GraphQL Tools and Libraries You Should Know in 2019
---
#  13 GraphQL Tools and Libraries You Should Know in 2019
[GraphQL](https://graphql.org/) was developed internally by Facebook in 2012 before being publicly released in 2015. On 7 November 2018, it was moved to the GraphQL Foundation, hosted by the Linux Foundation. Following this, a rich vibrant ecosystem began to grow around it as GraphQL became increasingly adopted.

GraphQl is basically a ״query language for your API, and a server-side runtime for executing queries by using a type system you define for your data״. It isn’t tied to any database or storage and is backed by your code and data. A GraphQL query is a string sent to the runtime that returns JSON to the client.

This simple effectiveness gave birth to a vibrant ecosystem of content, talks, guides and -as always- a wide set of open source tools, clients, editors and libraries to complete and enhance the GraphQL workflow in the wild.

In this post, I’ll try to gather some of the best GraphQL tools and libraries around, from client libraries to IDEs and useful integrations. The **list isn’t ranked**, and please feel free to comment and add your own suggestions.

The [APOLLO](https://medium.com/u/e46fa1c99b40?source=post_page-----e4b9005f6fc2----------------------) platform is an implementation of GraphQL that helps you manage data from the cloud to your UI. It’s incrementally adoptable and can be layered over your existing services, including REST APIs and databases.

[Apollo-client](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-client) is the client library for Apollo GraphQL. It’s a “fully-featured caching GraphQL client with integrations for React, Angular, and more”. It allows you to easily build UI components that fetch data via GraphQL, which also makes it a very powerful combination with [Bit](https://bit.dev/). With a declarative approach to data fetching, all of the logic for retrieving your data, tracking loading and error states, and updating your UI is encapsulated in a single Query component- which can be composed with presentational components. This whole approach can make life much easier in many cases.

[Apollo-server](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-server) implements a spec-compliant GraphQL server which can be queried from any GraphQL client, including [Apollo Client](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react). It’s a way to quickly build a production-ready, self-documenting API for GraphQL clients, using data from any source. It’s open-source and works well as a stand-alone server, an add-on to an existing Node.js HTTP server, in “serverless” environments, and with any GraphQL schema built with [GraphQL.js](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js). Take a look.

- Also, see these 2 useful projects to complete to Apollo experience.

**[Bit](https://github.com/teambit/bit)** is an open source tool and platform that turns reusable code into components you can easily share and develop from different projects.

Since its release, it’s been gaining massive traction as a modular solution for organizing and sharing components between projects. While often used for UI components, it’s very useful for GraphQL APIs providing very unique abilities.

Using Bit, you can instantly turn your API examples and client (e.g. Apollo) into components that your team can easily share and use in any project while being able to modify the component’s code right from the consuming repo (!).

This means that your API integrations become a 2-way street, where the other side can play with the API example components and quickly make them work right from their own project, and quickly put it to use in their real context.

Here are GitHub’s GraphQL API examples shared as bit components:

Anyone can download these components, make changes as needed, and use them in their own environment. When the consuming end can make changes to the code right from their own project, it’s the easiest API integration yet.

**Example**- React Material UI components as a Bit component collection. Discover, use and develop each component right from your own project. Use Bit to very easily turn your own components into a shared collection like this.

```
import {graphql} from 'react-relay';graphql`
  query MyQuery {
    viewer { 
      id 
    } 
   } 
 `;
```

Relay is a JavaScript framework built by Facebook to serve as a performant and scalable infrastructure for applications using GraphQL.

Relay works as a bridge between React and GraphQL, to leverage the component-based encapsulated nature of React. Through Relay, components can specify what data they need and get it, so that components can be composed while the data needs of the app are localized per component.

Relay’s declarative approach lets you declare your data requirements using GraphQL and Relay will handle data fetching, while aggregating queries into network requests to efficiently fetch only what you need. Data can be mutated on the client and server using GraphQL mutations, with automatic data consistency, optimistic updates, and error handling.

While less popular than alternatives like Apollo, Facebook launched **relay-modern** with modifications like better mutation API, `QueryRenderer` improvements, optional routing and more. You can [view the changes here](https://facebook.github.io/relay/docs/en/new-in-relay-modern.html).
