---
ArticleId: 1481fa68-7545-4703-af22-d18c5e94184d
ArticleIndex: 52
Created: Dec 23, 2020 5:58 PM
URL: https://www.quora.com/Is-there-any-reason-not-to-use-OrientDB-Is-there-any-reason-to-opt-for-MongoDB-or-Neo4j
Updated: Dec 23, 2020 7:32 PM
WebClipIndex: 52
author: Kailash Vetal
secret: true
slug: 1481fa68-7545-4703-af22-d18c5e94184d
title: (1) Is there any reason not to use OrientDB? Is there any reason to opt for MongoDB or Neo4j? - Quora
---
#  (1) Is there any reason not to use OrientDB? Is there any reason to opt for MongoDB or Neo4j? - Quora
Hi,

I'm an OrientDB fan, please keep that in mind. There are a few things that cause concerns but thankfully some of these are being addressed as we speak. (2.1 and 2.2)

I will keep this brief and skip the longer list of why you should, perhaps, use OrientDB :)

1. Dense graphs can be a problem (vertices with millions of edges) if they need to be scanned in their entirety to find a small subset of suitable out-vertices. (ordered edges are supported now but indexing is missing)

2. Storage utilization (encoding/serialization etc.) could be a lot better. Take a look at something like Parqu...

Having used OrientDB for a while, I think I can now answer my own question.

Yes, there are some reasons not to use OrientDB, even though it's a very good database, generally speaking.

- The graph editor in OrientDB is super buggy. This can be very confusing if you're just starting out. This is not likely to cause any problems in a production website and/or for more advanced users, but it can be demotivating for beginners, who will very likely rely on the graph editor a lot.
- I find Neo4j's Cypher sometimes much more intuitive than the SQL-based query language in OrientDB. There are query's th...

I am in favour of OrientDB, I am building a product based on 3.0 and yes it was like working with bleeding edge technology, we did had bugs but the team at OrientDB is amazing and always resolved issues faster than we reported.

I love OrientDB for the following reasons.

1. It is nosql and provides schema.
2. supports multiple databases (neo4j doesn’t).
3. Supports out of the box clustering
4. supports most of the SQL (Neo4J we are forced to use cipher).
5. Embedded mode works the best.
6. Sequences (no support in Neo4J).

For someone who spend more than a decade with relational systems, doesn’t cost much effort to sh...

Main reason: Bugs, lots of them. Secondary reason: Lack of proper documentation.
Last time we tried to use Orient it was impossible to use at scale in a production environment.
Why? Simply because we couldn't move beyond development mode. We could not even move it to testing.
What are those bugs?
You can read the forums about all those or just google "bugs" "orientdb".
Having said that, the technology looks promising and we might give it another go in two years when it is more mature.
Why does it have so many bugs?
Like someone said, a hybrid db is a complex thing to tackle, lots of room fo...

My feeling is that the ecosystem around it hasn’t grown enough to allow me to feel confident I can find answers to the questions I would inevitably have.

It pretty much depends on your project, though.

I find it is very helpful to start a project in one database system with the plan to eventually move it to some other system based on what I learn of my usage patterns. If the original system is chosen over the other candidates, well and good.

But I’ve seen a lot of garbage build up around projec...

I'm not up to speed on OrientDB specifically, but just because a better Swiss army knife appears doesn't mean folks are going to stop using their chef's knives to chop their vegetables.

All of these databases are evolving, and there's a lot of momentum behind developments in Mongo, Neo4j, Cassandra, Couch.....

I think the innovations in hybrids generally are really interesting, but they always involve an extra layer of complexity, there's a lot to be said for simplicity, even if some performance is sacrificed. Do most consumers care that MP3s are compressed and lossy, or that CDs sound ...

Hello,
I am on the Orient Technologies team, so please consider this natural bias up front. First, thanks for considering OrientDB. You have recognized our most prominent design goal - to create an operational grade database that covers the largest use case possible without compromising speed.

As you've seen on our website, we are a document-graph database, meaning you can work with OrientDB very similar to MongoDB as a document database or as a native graph database. Your use case will dictate which feature set you will rely on more heavily. OrientDB will handle either use case natively.
...
